samples: matter: Introduce Watchdog for Matter (#15214)
nrfconnect/sdk-nrf: doc/nrf/protocols/matter/end_product/watchdog.rst

.. _ug_matter_device_watchdog:

Matter Watchdog
###############

A watchdog is a type of hardware timer responsible for rebooting the device if it does not receive a specific signal within a designated time window.
"Feeding" refers to the process of sending a signal to the watchdog module to reset the timer before it expires.

> In Matter samples, you can create multiple watchdog sources and assign them to specific functions.

Author: I created an abstraction for Zephyr's watchdog and called "Watchdog source" as a name dedicated to the abstraction, so it applies to the NCS Matter samples and Applications(Bridge & Weather station). In Zephyr, it is called differently but actually, I used the Zephyr's API inside.

> In Matter samples, you can create multiple watchdog sources and assign them to specific functions.

Author: Ok, I will add something like that. :)

Each watchdog source created must be fed to reset the timer and prevent the device from rebooting.

Overview
********

The Matter Watchdog is based on Zephyr's watchdog API and allows for the creation of multiple watchdog sources.
Each Matter Watchdog source utilizes a unique Global Watchdog channel and must be fed individually.
You can set a time window for the Watchdog timer and enable the automatic feeding feature.

The feeding feature depends on establishing an additional timer that periodically executes the created feeding callback function.
You can create your own feeding callback function and use it to call the ``Feed()`` method in a specific context.
This approach eliminates the need to directly call the ``Feed()`` method in your code.

A time window specifies the period within which the feeding signal must be sent to each Watchdog channel to reset the timer and prevent the device from rebooting.

> If the feeding signal is sent after the time window has elapsed, the device will reboot.

Author: You're right, it sounds better.

To enable the Matter Watchdog feature, set the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NCS_SAMPLE_MATTER_WATCHDOG` kconfig option to ``y``.
The feature is enabled by default for the release build type in all Matter samples and applications.

To set the timeout for the Watchdog timer, configure the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NCS_SAMPLE_MATTER_WATCHDOG_TIMEOUT` with a value in milliseconds.
By default, the timeout is set to 10 seconds.

Creating a Matter Watchdog source
*********************************

The Matter Watchdog feature is based on the ``Nrf::WatchdogSource`` class, which is located in the :file:`samples/matter/common/watchdog/watchdog.h` file.
Each Matter Watchdog source constructor includes two optional arguments:

* ``feedingInterval``, which specifies the duration in milliseconds for automatically calling the attached feeding callback.
* ``callback``, which is an implementation of the ``FeedingCallback`` that is called periodically at the defined ``feedingInterval``.

Feeding the Matter Watchdog
***************************

Each Matter Watchdog source must be fed separately in a specific context.
There are two options for feeding it:

> * Feeding automatically
> 
>   You can utilize the automatic feeding feature of the Matter Watchdog to periodically feed the Matter Watchdog source within a defined time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Feeding automatically
  You can utilize the automatic feeding feature of the Matter Watchdog to periodically feed the Matter Watchdog source within a defined time.
```
Since there are so many steps between the top-level bullets, I think using the term definition formatting will look nicer.

  To configure and enable the automatic feeding feature, follow these steps:

  1. Include the ``watchdog/watchdog.h`` file.

     .. code-block:: c++

        #include "watchdog/watchdog.h"

  2. Declare and define the ``FeedingCallback`` implementation in your application code.
     This implementation must be tailored to your needs.

     For example, here is an implementation of ``FeedingCallback`` for feeding the Matter Watchdog source within the Main thread:

     .. code-block:: c++

        void FeedFromApp(Nrf::Watchdog::WatchdogSource *source)
        {
	        if (source) {
		    Nrf::PostTask([source] { source->Feed(); });
	        }
        }

  2. Create a Matter Watchdog source and provide the ``uint32_t feedingInterval``, and ``FeedingCallback callback`` optional arguments to the Matter Watchdog source constructor.

     For example, here is a Matter Watchdog source object configured to call the previously defined callback every 200 ms:

     .. code-block:: c++

        Nrf::Watchdog::WatchdogSource myWatchdog(200, FeedFromApp);

  3. Enable the Global Watchdog module:

     .. code-block:: c++

        Nrf::Watchdog::Enable();

> * Feeding manually
> 
>   Manual feeding involves calling the ``Feed()`` method of the specific source

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Feeding manually
  Manual feeding involves calling the ``Feed()`` method of the specific source.
```

  To create, enable, and manually feed the Matter Watchdog source, complete the following steps:

  1. Create a Matter Watchdog source without any arguments.

     For example:

     .. code-block:: c++

        Nrf::Watchdog::WatchdogSource myWatchdog;

  2. Enable the Global Watchdog module:

    .. code-block:: c++

        Nrf::Watchdog::Enable();

  3. Call the ``Feed()`` method at the specific place in the code where you want to prevent code blocking:

     .. code-block:: c++

        myWatchdog.Feed();

Enabling and disabling the Watchdog peripheral
**********************************************

> The Global Watchdog used in Matter Samples is a single peripheral that operates independently of the CPU cores and includes multiple channels.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Global Watchdog used in the |NCS| Matter samples is a single peripheral that operates independently of the CPU cores and includes multiple channels.
```

Although it is necessary to feed channels within their respective time windows separately, you cannot disable an individual channel without disabling the entire Watchdog peripheral.
Instead, you can disable the entire Watchdog peripheral, and if you wish to re-enable it, you must also restore all other Watchdog sources.

To enable the Global Watchdog module, use the ``Nrf::Watchdog::Enable()`` function:

.. code-block:: c++

    Nrf::Watchdog::Enable();

From this point, all previously created Matter Watchdog objects must be fed periodically to comply with the time window requirement.

To disable the Global Watchdog module, use the ``Nrf::Watchdog::Disable()`` function:

.. code-block:: c++

    Nrf::Watchdog::Disable();

This method disables all previously enabled Matter Watchdog objects, removes their channels, and stops the automatic feeding (if it was configured and enabled).

To enable Matter Watchdog sources again, you need to call the ``Restore()`` method on each of them.

For example:

    .. code-block:: c++

        myWatchdog1.Restore();
        myWatchdog2.Restore();

> End then enable the Global Watchdog module:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After enabling the sources, enable the Global Watchdog module:
```

.. code-block:: c++

    Nrf::Watchdog::Enable();

> Limited lifetime of the Watchdog source
> ***************************************

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Limited lifetime watchdog source
********************************
```

> Watchdog source can be created locally and removed when the objects is deleting.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A watchdog source can be created locally and removed when the objects is deleting.
```

> For example you can use it in the specific function:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, you can use create a source in a specific function:
```

.. code-block:: c++

    void DoTask()
    {
        Nrf::Watchdog::WatchdogSource watchdogSource;

        {
            while(condition)
            {
                /* Do some time-critical operations and break loop */
                watchdogSource.Feed();
            }
        }
    }

> In the function mentioned above, when the Watchdog source object is created, a new Watchdog is also created and it must be fed periodically.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the example function above, when the watchdog source object is created, a new watchdog is also created and it must be fed periodically.
```

> After performing some time-critical operations and exiting the loop in the ``DoTask`` function, the Watchdog source object is deleted, and its destructor frees the assigned channel.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After performing some time-critical operations and exiting the loop in the ``DoTask`` function, the watchdog source object is deleted, and its destructor frees the assigned channel.
```

.. note::

>     The maximum number of simultaneously active Watchdog sources is 8. Therefore, creating a ninth Watchdog source will trigger an assert.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    The maximum number of simultaneously active watchdog sources is 8.
    Creating a ninth watchdog source will trigger an assert.
```
Should this note also be in the creating section?

Author: Yes, it should be. Will add it there.

Default Matter Watchdog implementation
**************************************

> In the Matter common module, there is a default implementation of two Watchdog sources that are automatically created for the release build version of a Matter sample.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the Matter common module, there is a default implementation of two watchdog sources that are automatically created for the release build version of a Matter sample.
```

Instead, you can disable the entire watchdog peripheral, and if you wish to re-enable it, you must also restore all other watchdog sources.

To enable the Global watchdog module, use the ``Nrf::Watchdog::Enable()`` function:

.. code-block:: c++

    Nrf::Watchdog::Enable();

From this point, all previously created Matter watchdog objects must be fed periodically to comply with the time window requirement.

To disable the Global watchdog module, use the ``Nrf::Watchdog::Disable()`` function:

.. code-block:: c++

    Nrf::Watchdog::Disable();

This method disables all previously enabled Matter watchdog objects, removes their channels, and stops the automatic feeding (if it was configured and enabled).

To enable Matter watchdog sources again, you need to call the ``Restore()`` method on each of them.

For example:

    .. code-block:: c++

        myWatchdog1.Restore();
        myWatchdog2.Restore();

After enabling the sources, enable the Global watchdog module:

.. code-block:: c++

    Nrf::Watchdog::Enable();

Limited lifetime watchdog source
********************************

A watchdog source can be created locally and removed when the objects is deleting.

> For example, you can use create a source in a specific function:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, you can create a source in a specific function:
```

     .. code-block:: c++

        if(!Nrf::Watchdog::Enable())
        {
            return false;
        }

Feeding manually
  Manual feeding involves calling the ``Feed()`` method of the specific source.
  This approach provides the best power consumption, because feeding only takes place if the CPU is not in sleep mode.

  To create, enable, and manually feed the Matter Watchdog source, complete the following steps:

  1. Create a Matter Watchdog source without any arguments.

     For example:

     .. code-block:: c++

        Nrf::Watchdog::WatchdogSource myWatchdog;

  2. Try to install the Matter watchdog source and check the result of the function:

     .. code-block:: c++

        if(!Nrf::Watchdog::InstallSource(myWatchdog))
        {
            LOG_ERR("Watchdog source cannot be installed.");
        }

  3. Enable the Global Watchdog module and check the function result:

    .. code-block:: c++

        if(!Nrf::Watchdog::Enable())
        {
            return false;
        }

  4. Call the ``Feed()`` method at the specific place in the code where you want to prevent code blocking:

     .. code-block:: c++

        myWatchdog.Feed();

.. note::

>     If the ``InstallSource(WatchdogSource &source)`` function returns ``false`` it may mean that there is no available watchdog channel to assign.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    If the ``InstallSource(WatchdogSource &source)`` function returns ``false``, it can mean that there is no available watchdog channel to assign.
```

>     Ensure that you have at least one of the eight possible channels is available.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Ensure that you have at least one of the eight possible channels available.
```

>     It may returns ``false`` also when the global watchdog module is not declared in the Devicetree specification file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    The function can also return ``false`` when the global watchdog module is not declared in the Devicetree specification file.
    Ensure that the module is properly declared.
```

* ``feedingInterval`` - Specifies the duration in milliseconds for automatically calling the attached feeding callback.
* ``callback`` - A ``FeedingCallback`` implementation that is called periodically at the defined ``feedingInterval``.

> After creating a watchdog source you need to install it in the global watchdog module to assign a watchdog channel.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After creating a watchdog source, you need to install it in the global watchdog module to assign a watchdog channel.
```

> To do it call the ``InstallSource(WatchdogSource &source)`` function providing the created source and check if the result of the function is ``true``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To do install it, call the ``InstallSource(WatchdogSource &source)`` function and provide the created source and check that the result of the function is ``true``.

> After that enable the global watchdog by calling ``Enable()`` function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After this, enable the global watchdog by calling the ``Enable()`` function.
```

> This is an example of creating two watchdog sources, one without and second one with the automatic feeding feature enabled:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This following is an example of creating two watchdog sources, one without and second one with the automatic feeding feature enabled:

Feeding automatically
  You can utilize the automatic feeding feature of the Matter watchdog to periodically feed the Matter watchdog source within a defined time.

>   This approach may cause a higher power consumption, especially when the feedback interval is set to the low value.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  This approach can cause a higher power consumption, especially when the feedback interval is set to a low value.

>   If you want to keep low power consumption consider using the manually feeding approach.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  If you want to keep low power consumption, consider using the manual feeding approach instead.

        void FeedFromApp(Nrf::Watchdog::WatchdogSource *source)
        {
	        if (source)
            {
		        Nrf::PostTask([source] { source->Feed(); });
	        }
        }

  3. Create a Matter watchdog source and provide the ``uint32_t feedingInterval``, and ``FeedingCallback callback`` optional arguments to the Matter watchdog source constructor.

     For example, here is a Matter watchdog source object configured to call the previously defined callback every 200 ms:

     .. code-block:: c++

        Nrf::Watchdog::WatchdogSource myWatchdog(200, FeedFromApp);

>   4. Try to install the Matter watchdog source:

Reviewer: This step should have something after the sample function about what the user should do if the attempt fails.

Author: I will add a note for that at the bottom of this point to cover both appoaches.

     .. code-block:: c++

        if(!Nrf::Watchdog::InstallSource(myWatchdog))
        {
            LOG_ERR("Watchdog source cannot be installed.");
        }

  5. Enable the Global watchdog module:

     .. code-block:: c++

        Nrf::Watchdog::Enable();

Feeding manually
  Manual feeding involves calling the ``Feed()`` method of the specific source.

>   This approach provides the best power consumption, because feeding takes place only if the CPU is not in the sleep mode.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  This approach provides the best power consumption, because feeding only takes place if the CPU is not in sleep mode.
```

    Nrf::Watchdog::Enable();

From this point, all previously created Matter watchdog sources must be fed periodically to comply with the time window requirement.

To disable the Global watchdog module, use the ``Nrf::Watchdog::Disable()`` function:

.. code-block:: c++

    Nrf::Watchdog::Disable();

This method disables all previously enabled Matter watchdog sources, removes their channels, and stops the automatic feeding (if it was configured and enabled).

> To disable a specific Matter watchdog source delete the created object.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To disable a specific Matter watchdog source, delete the created object.
```
